wisest is he who knows what he does not know.
human behavior flows from three main sources: desire, emotion, and knowledge.
false words are not only evil in themselves, but they infect the soul with evil.
the measure of a man is what he does with power.
the price of apathy towards public affairs is to be ruled by evil men.
enjoy life. there's plenty of time to be dead. be kind, for everyone you meet is fighting a harder battle.
those who tell the stories rule society.
one cannot make a slave of a free person, for a free person is free even in a prison.
you should not honor men more than truth.
the greatest wealth is to live content with little.
integrity is your destiny  it is the light that guides your way.
welcome out of the cave, my friend. it's a bit colder out here, but the stars are just beautiful.
those who are able to see beyond the shadows and lies of their culture will never be understood let alone believed by the masses.
there is nothing so delightful as the hearing, or the speaking of truth. for this reason, there is no conversation so agreeable as that of the man of integrity, who hears without any intention to betray, and speaks without any intention to deceive.
the worst of all deceptions is self  deception.
education in music is most sovereign because more than anything else rhythm and harmony find their way to the innermost soul and take strongest hold upon it.
be kind. every person you meet.
to begin is the most important part of any quest and by far the most courageous.
reality is created by the mind, we can change our reality by changing our mind.
poverty doesn't come because of the decrease of wealth but because of the increase of desires.
a wise man speaks because he has something to say; a fool because he has to say something.
is fighting a difficult battle.
no one is a friend to his friend who does not love in return.
the right question is usually more important than the right answer.
if one has made a mistake, and fails to correct it, one has made a greater mistake.
ignorance is the root cause of all difficulties.
don't force your children into your ways, for they were created for a time different from your own.
i am the wisest man alive, for i know one thing, and that is that i know nothing.
perfect wisdom has four parts: wisdom, the principle of doing things aright. justice, the principle of doing things equally in public and private. fortitude, the principle of not fleeing danger, but meeting it. temperance, the principle of subduing desires and living moderately.
good people do not need laws to tell them to act responsibly, while bad people will find a way around the laws.
the one who learns and learns and doesn't practice is like the one who plows and plows and never plants.
the first and the best victory is to conquer self.
someday, in the distant future, our grand  children' s grand  children will develop a new equivalent of our classrooms. they will spend many hours in front of boxes with fires glowing within. may they have the wisdom to know the difference between light and knowledge.
never discourage anyone who continually makes progress, no matter how slow  even if that someone is yourself!.
a dog has the soul of a philosopher.
a true artist is someone who gives birth to a new reality.
harmony sinks deep into the recesses of the soul and takes its strongest hold there, bringing grace also to the body & mind as well. music is a moral law. it gives a soul to the universe, wings to the mind, flight to the imagination, a charm to sadness, and life to everything. it is the essence of order.
do not expect justice where might is right.
when you feel grateful, you become great, and eventually attract great things.
if we are to have any hope for the future, those who have lanterns must pass them on to others.
we see many instances of cities going down like sinking ships to their destruction. there have been such wrecks in the past and there surely will be others in the future, caused by the wickedness of captains and crews alike. for these are guilty men, whose sin is supreme ignorance of what matters most.
mankind will never see an end of trouble until lovers of wisdom come to hold political power, or the holders of power become lovers of wisdom.
the blame is his who chooses: god is blameless.
those who are too smart to engage in politics are punished by being governed by those who are dumber.
if the head and the body are to be well, you must begin by curing the soul.
thinking is the soul talking to itself.
the greatest privilege of a human life is to become a.
midwife to the awakening of the soul in another person.
all wars are fought for the sake of getting money.
no one is more hated than he who speaks the truth.
a library of wisdom, is more precious than all wealth, and all things that are desirable cannot be compared to it. whoever therefore claims to be zealous of truth, of happiness, of wisdom or knowledge, must become a lover of books.
one of the penalties for refusing to participate in politics is that you end up being governed by your inferiors.
happiness springs from doing good and helping others.
when man is not properly trained, he is the most savage animal on the face of the globe.
the souls of people, on their way to earth  life, pass through a room full of lights; each takes a taper    often only a spark    to guide it in the dim country of this world. but some souls, by rare fortune, are detained longer    have time to grasp a handful of tapers, which they weave into a torch. these are the torch  bearers of humanity    its poets, seers and saints, who lead and lift the race out of darkness, toward the light. they are the law  givers and saviors, the light  bringers, way  showers and truth  tellers, and without them, humanity would lose its way in the dark.
pleasure is the greatest incentive to evil.
we become what we contemplate.
he who does not desire power is fit to hold it.
the three wishes of every man: to be healthy, to be rich by honest means, and to be beautiful.
do not train children to learning by force and harshness, but direct them to it by what amuses their minds.
how can you prove whether at this moment we are sleeping, and all our thoughts are a dream; or whether we are awake, and talking to one another in the waking state?.
the philosopher is in love with truth, that is, not with the changing world of sensation, which is the object of opinion, but with the unchanging reality which is the object of knowledge.
the greatest mistake physicians make is that they attempt to cure the body without attempting to cure the mind, yet the mind and the body are one and should not be treated separately!.
he who is only an athlete is too crude, too vulgar, too much a savage. he who is a scholar only is too soft, to effeminate. the ideal citizen is the scholar athlete, the man of thought and the man of action.
i know not how i may seem to others, but to myself i am but a small child wandering upon the vast shores of knowledge, every now and then finding a small bright pebble to content myself with.
he who love touches walks not in darkness.
pleasure is the bait of sin.
a good decision is based on knowledge, and not on numbers.
the cure of the part should not be attempted without treatment of the whole. no attempt should be made to cure the body without the soul. let no one persuade you to cure the head until he has first given you his soul to be cured, for this is the great error of our day, that physicians first separate the soul from the body.
every heart sings a song, incomplete, until another heart whispers back.
if you do not take an interest in the affairs of your government, then you are doomed to live under the rule of fools.
better to complete a small task well, than to do much imperfectly.